[MUSIC PLAYING]
A century of Earth's
radio transmissions
has now washed over thousands
of other star systems,
carrying with it some of
our greatest broadcast
masterpieces, as well
as our worst reality TV.
What are the chances that alien
civilizations have detected
and even decoded these signals?
We are a young
technological civilization.
An advanced alien race
monitoring our planet,
even from the nearest
neighboring star,
would have seen nothing, radio
quietness until only around
a century ago.
Then, beginning with
the faint sporadic buzz
of the first experiments
with wireless transmission,
the radio brightness
of this small planet
would have bloomed into
a continuous planet-wide
cacophony of TV and radio
broadcasts, satellite relays,
and radar pulses.
This bubble of chatter
is, as I speak,
spreading out into the
galaxy at the speed of light,
the unmistakable signature of
an emerging technological power.
The outer edge of this bubble is
now over a hundred light years
away.
And it carries with it the
first transatlantic radio
transmission of Marconi himself.
That edge may be
hopelessly diffused,
but it's followed closely
by the much brighter
80-light-year shell, on which
rides the footage of the 1936
Berlin Olympics, episodes
of the "Lone Ranger,"
and Orson Welles' ill-fated
radio adaptation of "War
of the Worlds."
That shell has washed over
several thousand star systems.
Based on Kepler Space
Telescope observations,
that also means thousands of
potentially habitable planets,
lots of chances for
hypothetical civilizations
to have learned
of our existence.
So the question is,
who could have seen us?
What manner of civilization
would be powerful enough
to sense this bubble?
What tech level would be
needed to actually decode
the signal it carries?
If aliens arrive on our doorstep
tomorrow, would they have been
alerted to our presence
by Nikola Tesla's
first experiments, broadcast
footage of the Moon landing,
the "Phantom Menace?"
To answer the question
of who can see us,
it's helpful to first
ask who could we see?
After all, humanity
remains the one example
of a technological
civilization, for now.
Our best astronomers
have been engaged
in the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence,
SETI, in earnest since the
'60s, when Frank Drake first
peeked at the stars Tau
Ceti and Epsilon Eridani.
Drake peered into the so-called
water hole, a narrow frequency
range in the radio spectrum
between a pair of H and OH
emission spikes, which
itself is within the broader
window from 1 to 10 gigahertz.
There, the natural universe
is especially quiet.
Surely, this is the
window where aliens
would choose to broadcast
their messages welcoming us
into the galactic community.
And, of course,
Drake saw nothing.
Decades of SETI
programs followed,
utilizing several of the
world's great radio telescopes,
like Arecibo in Puerto Rico
and the Parkes radio telescope
in Australia.
These searches often
focused on the water hole
or the surrounding
quiet frequency window.
But with the exception
of some one-off oddities,
the search was not successful.
The 1977 Wow! signal
is the most compelling,
a narrow-frequency
radio blast detected
in the water hole, that
still has no broadly accepted
natural explanation.
But no one ever saw it again.
Apparently, no one
has tried particularly
hard to get our attention.
And it's important to understand
that these searches could only
have been successful
if there were
deliberate powerful
beacons emitted
by an alien civilization.
The radio leakage produced by
their own internal broadcasts
would be much harder to detect.
Our best-targeted search so far,
the SETI Institute's Project
Phoenix, scanned 800 stars
within 200 light years.
At that range, it could have
picked up a gigawatt beacon
beamed directly at us.
But it would only have picked
up leakage from a civilization's
internal broadcasts from
within a couple of light years,
if those broadcasts with the
same strength as our own.
In that range, there is
exactly one star, ours.
An alien civilization at
exactly our current tech level
would never have
seen our TV bubble.
We have sent out more
powerful beacons,
like the stream of 10,000
tweets and celebrity
videos that Arecibo blasted
in the direction of the Wow!
signal.
But that's a long shot,
and perhaps for the best.
I'm not sure we want
our first contact
to be a typical slice
of the twitterverse.
One of the reasons it's hard
to spot unintentional radio
leakage is that a distant
civilization's radio bubble
is likely to
overlap in frequency
with our own transmissions.
This is another advantage for
searching for alien signals
in and around the water hole.
At around 1500 megahertz, it's
in the ultrahigh frequency
(UHF) band.
Most TV broadcasts
air at the tens
to hundreds of megahertz of
the merely very-high frequency
(VHF) band.
VHF works better for
over-air broadcasts
because it carries
further and is less
blocked by buildings and such.
So we often search the UHF
to avoid the thick soup
of our own VHF chatter.
But surely aliens are
working with the same physics
that we are.
Perhaps we miss each other
because we can't easily
peer through our
own local VHF soups.
But there is a way to peer
straight through our own radio
noise as though it wasn't there.
The answer is interferometry.
Two radio telescopes separated
by a large enough distance
can filter out
local transmissions.
A signal that appears in
one, but not the other,
must be an earthly transmission.
Now, that's not the main
purpose of interferometry.
That is to increase
the spatial resolution
of your observations.
You get the resolution
of a telescope
as large as the separation
of the component
telescopes, also super-useful.
Interferometry has been
around for a while.
But we're only now building
an interferometer facility
with the sensitivity to
potentially see an alien TV
bubble to many light years
and that is large enough
to filter out local noise.
It's the Square
Kilometer Array or SKA.
The SKA is actually
many, many telescopes.
Arrays of thousands
of radio dishes
will be built in Africa
and hundreds of thousands
of antenna installed
in Australia.
When connected up,
it'll effectively
form a giant radio telescope,
with over a square kilometer
surface area.
But as an interferometer, it has
the resolution of a telescope
thousands of kilometers across.
Its sensitivity and
pinpoint resolving power
will be vastly greater than
any telescope of any type
that we have ever built.
The SKA is not being built
to search for aliens.
One of its primary
purposes will be
to catch the radio emission from
hydrogen gas in the extremely
early universe.
That emission, produced at 21
centimeters wavelength, or 1420
megahertz frequency,
is, by definition,
one of the boundaries
of the waterhole.
But if such radio
waves travel to us
from the earliest
of times, then they
become stretched out as they
travel through an expanding
universe.
That redshifted early hydrogen
emission is now found slap
in the middle of the noisy lower
frequency part of our own TV
broadcast spectrum.
To spot these radio photons,
we need a truly gigantic
interferometer, both
for extreme sensitivity
and to eliminate
our own radio buzz.
That's the SKA.
Such a machine also just happens
to be perfect for spotting
alien television bubbles.
According to the calculations
of Harvard University's Avi Loeb
and Matias Zaldarriaga, the
SKA should be sensitive enough
to spot our own TV bubble
from a hundred or more
light years away.
So will we soon be picking
up extra terrestrial sitcoms?
Not quite.
Loeb and Zaldarriga's
numbers assume
pointing SKA at a target star
system for an entire month
and adding up all of the
radio emission over that time.
For an artificial
radio source, that
would look like emission
over a narrow-frequency range
that doesn't correspond
to any natural process.
These emission spikes may
also shift back and forth
in frequency due
to Doppler shift,
as the distant technologically
advanced planet
orbits its star.
So that's enough to identify
a technological source,
but not to actually
decode the signal.
An alien civilization
with their own SKA
certainly couldn't
watch Earth TV.
To do that, they
would need to achieve
SKA's one-month sensitivity in
a tiny fraction of a second.
That means compensating for
the difference in exposure
or integration time with the
sheer size of the telescope.
Let's figure it out.
What would be
needed to, say, tune
in to the first season of the
original "Star Trek" series?
That signal is now
50 light years away.
Assume a bit rate of
10 million per second,
for a miserable 30 frames
per second, at 200 by 200
resolution, and
only 8-bit color.
Forget audio, which is a shame
because the original series
dialog is awesome.
The aliens would need a
radio telescope trillions
of times the SKA's surface
area and equivalent to a dish
around three times the
radius of the Moon's orbit.
This is perhaps conceivable
for a Type II civilization.
Although it's
exceedingly unlikely
that there's one of those
within our radio bubble.
We may even be a
little optimistic
in thinking that the SKA
will detect alien TV.
As the SETI Institute's
John Billingham,
along with James
Bedford, point out,
that one month integration
time requires a very consistent
narrow frequency
signal, which may not
be consistent with
typical broadcasts.
But remember, humanity is young
as a radio-noisy civilization.
Simple probability says
that any other civilization
is likely to be ahead
of us on the curve.
It's not hard to imagine them
building a much larger SKA,
without going full-Type II.
Our SKA will cost a
few billion dollars
by the time it's done in 2030.
That's a significant investment,
but only a tiny fraction
of the global GDP.
For a slightly more
advanced civilization,
that's several Moore's
law doublings ahead of us
in various technologies, and
accounting for moderate GDP
growth over a century
or two, a super-SKA,
with several hundred square
kilometers of collecting area,
would constitute the
same degree of investment
as our own
one-square-kilometer array.
In that case, Earth's
TV bubble would
be spotted within
hours, or even minutes,
of aliens pointing the
facility to our solar system,
even if they weren't
looking for us.
Surely, any advanced
civilization
is curious about
its own origins.
That redshifted 21-centimeter
hydrogen emission
really is one of the most
important keys to understanding
the very early universe.
It's pretty natural to
want to scan the heavens
at exactly the frequencies where
we earthlings are the noisiest.
If there's a slightly more
technologically advanced
civilization within
our radio bubble,
they've probably seen us.
However, our steady
broadcasts have only
washed over a few
hundred solar-type star
systems and only a few
thousand stars total.
Technological
civilizations would
need to be extremely common
throughout our galaxy--
and I mean tens of millions
of them across the Milky Way--
for there to be any
chance that there's
another one so close to
us, But we just don't know.
If anyone else inhabits
this very local region
of the galaxy, then
they may have been
aware of us for some time now.
Any civilization within
40 to 50 light years
could have sent a return signal
that will reach us any day.
Their fleets of
welcome ships will
be a little further
behind, but no doubt
carry only the best wishes
for their noisiest neighbors
in nearby spacetime.
Hey, everyone.
I just wanted to
say thanks again
for those of you
sponsoring us on Patreon.
I want to give a very
special shout-out
to Luna IT Solutions,
who are sponsoring us
at the quasar level.
Thanks a ton.
It really is a huge help.
A couple of weeks ago, we
looked back into black holes
and studied the nature
of the event horizon.
You guys had some excellent
and quite tricky questions.
Luca$sino asks what we would
really see if we followed
the monkey directly
through the event horizon?
Would it appear ahead of us
despite previously appearing
frozen on the event horizon?
Well, sort of, yes.
The light from the instant
of the monkey's crossing
of the event horizon
is eternally trapped
at that horizon.
It's trying to walk upwards
on a downward escalator
of spacetime.
But you're traveling
down that same escalator
and so you pass this light.
And so you see the instant
of the monkey's crossing.
The escalator speeds
up as you descend.
And so light that the monkey
emitted from below that point
is trying to go up, but is
actually going downwards.
And yet, you're traveling
downwards faster.
So you overtake
some of that light,
which means you see the
monkey ahead of you.
Douglas Oak asks
a great question
that I've heard asked before.
If time dilation
approaches infinity,
do you reach the singularity
before the black hole
evaporates?
OK.
So a distant immortal observer,
with a ridiculously good
telescope, will detect
photons from the falling
monkey at all future times.
Eventually, those photons will
come billions, even trillions,
of years apart from each other
and be hugely redshifted.
For an eternal non-leaking black
hole, there is no last photon.
But real black holes decay.
And so the final burst
of Hawking radiation
as a black hole evaporates
will be accompanied
by all of the
remaining light emitted
by everything that fell into
it as it crossed the event
horizon.
But the infalling
stuff isn't saved.
Although we never saw the
moment of its crossing,
that did happen.
Its matter became part of
the black hole and re-emerges
as that Hawking radiation.
Grim Reaper Of Trolls is
curious about taking their warp
drive into a black hole.
Well, I would encourage it.
You can escape a black
hole by traveling faster
than the speed of light.
In principle, you can do
that with a warp drive.
The probably impossible
technology of the warp drive
allows you to cause
a patch of space
to move at really any speed
you have the energy to reach.
So you could resist the
faster-than-light flow of space
within the black hole.
The event horizon
itself just wouldn't
apply within your warp bubble.
You know, there's probably
a Penrose diagram for this.
I'll look into it.
Some people complained about
my use of the expression
"escape velocity greater
than the speed of light"
at the beginning of the episode.
First, let me note that
I gave that statement
in a list of popular examples
of oversimplifications
about black holes.
Second, it's not actually
an incorrect statement.
Despite the derision it
receives in nerd circles,
it's accepted to
talk about the escape
velocity at the
surface of the Earth
because we're used to
Newtonian approximations there.
But it's no less accurate
near a black hole.
At the event horizon, you need
to travel at the speed of light
relative to the black
hole's stationary frame
of reference as recorded
by a distant observer.
That's the velocity
you need to escape.
The reason that people
poo-poo the expression "escape
velocity" is that it reminds
us of a strange coincidence.
You happen to get exactly
the right size for the event
horizon if you use Newtonian
gravity to calculate
the distance at which the
escape velocity reaches
the speed of light.
The correct way
to get this number
is by using general relativity
to find the point where
the flow of spacetime
reaches the speed of light.
But the concept of escape
velocity at the event horizon
is still as meaningful as it is
from the surface of the Earth.
It's a useful classical
simplification in both cases.
Cornerrecord asks
about that thing when
you're in a black
hole and time becomes
space and space becomes time?
Well, that's probably a
topic for an entire video.
So for now, I'll just
quote what's his name.
The inward direction acts
like the future direction.
So once inside the horizon,
avoiding a singularity
is like avoiding next Tuesday.
[MUSIC PLAYING]